# Jonah 1

1. Now the word of the Lord came to Jonah the son of Amittai, saying,
2. ‘Arise, go to Nineveh, that great borough, and chy ayenst it; for her
   wickedness has come up before me.’
3. But Jonah rose up to flee to Tarshish from the anwardness of the Lord, and
   went down to Joppa; and he found a ship going to Tarshish: so he abought the
   fare thereof, and went down into it, to go with hem to Tarshish from the
   anwardness of the Lord.
4. But the Lord sent out a great wind into the sea, and there was a mighty ist
   in the sea, so that the ship threatened to break.
5. Then the shippers were fearful, and every were chyed to his god, and threw
   forth the wares that were in the ship into the sea, to lighten it of hem.
   But Jonah had gone down into the sides of the ship; and he lay, and was fast
   asleep.
6. So the shiplord came to him, and said to him, ‘What meanest thou, O sleeper?
   Arise, chy upon thy God, if only so God might think upon us, so that we
   queal not.’
7. And every one said to his sithe, ‘Come, and let us draw lots, that we may
   know for whose making this evil is upon us.’ So hy drew lots, and the lot
   fell upon Jonah.
8. Then hy said to him, ‘Tell us, we bid thee, for whose making this evil is
   upon us; What is thy work? and whence comest thou? what is thy homeland? and
   of what folk art thou?’
9. And he said to hem, ‘I am Hebreish; and I fear the Lord, the God of heaven,
   which hath made the sea and the dry land.’
10. Then the weres were most fearful, and said to him, ‘Why hast thou done
    this?’ For the weres knew that he fled from the anwardness of the Lord, for
    he had told hem.
11. Then hy said to him, ‘What shall we do to thee, so the sea may be steady to
    us?’ For the sea stormed, and was reigh.
12. And he said to hem, ‘Nim me up, and throw me forth into the sea; then the
    sea will be steady to you: for I know that for my sake this great ist is
    upon you.’
13. Nevertheless the weres rowed hard to bring it to the land; but hy could
    not: for the sea stormed, and was reigh ayenst hem.
14. Therefore hy chyed to the Lord, and said, ‘We beseech thee, O Lord, we
    beseech thee, let us not queal for this were's life, and lay not upon us
    sackless blood: for thou, O Lord, hast done as thou pleasedst.’
15. So they nimmed up Jonah, and throw him forth into the sea: and the sea let
    up from its irsing.
16. Then the weres most feared the Lord, and bade a tiver to the Lord, and made
    oaths.
17. Now the Lord had yat a great fish ready to swallow up Jonah. And Jonah was
    in the belly of the fish three days and three nights.

<!-- Abbreviations -->


<!-- Footnotes -->


<!-- BUFFER -->
