# Jonah 4 - Jonah's Wrath at the Lord's Evensorrow

1. But this most misquemed Jonah, and he was highly wroth.
2. And he bade to the Lord, and said, ‘I bid thee, O Lord, was not this my
   saying, when I was yet in my homeland? Therefore I fled before to Tarshish:
   for I knew that thou art an eesty God, and mildheart, slow to wrothen, and
   of great kindness, and who beruses from sending evil.
3. ‘Therefore now, O Lord, nim, I beseech thee, my life from me; for it is
   better for me to queal than to live.’
4. Then said the Lord, ‘Doest thou well to be wroth?’
5. So Jonah went out of the borough, and sat on the east side of the borough,
   and there he made a shamble, and sat under it in the shadow, till he might
   see what would become of the borough.
6. And the Lord God yat a thove wort[^kikayon] ready, and made it come over
   Jonah, so that it might be a shadow over his head, to aleese him from his
   heartsickness. So Jonah was most glad of the wort.
7. But God made a worm ready when the morning rose the next day, and it smote
   the wort so that it withered.
8. And it came to ago, when the sun did arise, that God made an aver east wind
   ready; and the sun beat upon the head of Jonah, so that he blacked out, and
   wished in himself to queal, and said, ‘It is better for me to queal than to
   live.’
9. And God said to Jonah, ‘Doest thou well to be wroth for the wort?’ And he
   said, ‘I do well to be wroth, even until death.’
10. Then said the Lord, ‘Thou hast had sorrow for the wort, for that which thou
    hast not worked, neither hast thou made it grow; that which came up in a
    night, and quole in a night:
11. And should not I spare Nineveh, that great borough, wherein there are more
    than a hundred and twenty thousand folks that cannot make out her right
    hand from her left; and also much livestock?

<!-- Footnotes -->
[^kikayon]: The Hebrew word is קִיקָיוֹן (qîqāyôn). According to Wiktionary,
    under the English word *kikayon*, this is “a plant mentioned in the Book of
    Jonah, where it provides shade; possibly a gourd or a castor oil plant.”
    Many translations of the bible say "gourd" or "leafy plant" (here
    translated as *thove wort*), and the NIV Exhaustive Concordance Dictionary
    lists the word as meaning "caster-oil vine" or "cucumber plant".
