# Genesis 1 - The beginning

1. In the beginning God made the heavens and the earth.
2. Now the earth was shapeless and empty, darkness was over the bred of the
   deep, and the Ghost of God was hovering over the waters.
3. And God said, ‘Let there be light,’ and there was light.
4. God saw that the light was good, and he sundered the light from the
   darkness.
5. God named the light ‘day’, and the darkness he named ‘night’. And there was
   morning – the first day.
6. And God said, ‘Let there be a wholf between the waters to sunder water from
   water.’
7. So God made the wholf and sundered the water under the wholf from the water
   above it. And it was so.
8. God named the wholf ‘lift’. And there was evening, and there was morning –
   the twoth day.
9. And God said, ‘Let the water under the lift be gathered to one spot, and let
   dry ground arise.’ And it was so.
10. God named the dry ground ‘land’, and the gathered waters he named ‘seas’.
    And God saw that it was good.
11. Then God said, ‘Let the land bring forth blead: seed-bearing worts[^plant]
    and trees on the land that bear ovet mid[^mid] seed in it, abiding by her
    many kinds.’ And it was so.
12. The land brought forth blead: worts bearing seed abiding by her kinds and
    trees bearing ovet mid seed in it abiding by her kinds. And God saw that it
    was good.
13. And there was evening, and there was morning – the third day.
14. And God said, ‘Let there be lights in the wholf of the lift to sunder the
    day from the night, and let hem work as sains to mark holy times, and days
    and years,
15. and let hem be lights in the wholf of the lift to yeave light on the
    earth.’ And it was so.
16. God made two great lights – the greater light to lord over the day and the
    lesser light to lord over the night. He also made the stars.
17. God set hem in the wholf of the lift to yeave light on the earth,
18. to lord over the day and the night, and to sunder light from darkness. And
    God saw that it was good.
19. And there was evening, and there was morning – the fourth day.
20. And God said, ‘Let the water teem mid living seadeer, and let birds fly
    above the earth thwarst the wholf of the lift’
21. So God made the great seadeer and every living thing mid which the water
    teems and that agoeth about in it, abiding by her kinds, and every
    feathered bird abiding by its kind. And God saw that it was good.
22. God blessed hem and said, ‘Be wassombere and feelfold and fill the water in
    the seas, and let the birds tider on the earth.’
23. And there was evening, and there was morning – the fifth day.
24. And God said, ‘Let the land bring forth living deer abiding by her kinds:
    the livestock, the deer that ago along the ground, and the wild deer, each
    abiding by its kind.’ And it was so.
25. God made the wild deer abiding by her kinds, the livestock abiding by her
    kinds, and all the deer that ago along the ground abiding by her kinds. And
    God saw that it was good.
26. Then God said, ‘Let us make mankind in our anlikeness, in our likeness, so
    that hy may lord over the fish in the sea and the birds in the lift, over
    the livestock and all the wild deer, and over all the deer that ago along
    the ground.’
27. So God made mankind in her own anlikeness, in the anlikeness of God hy made
    hem; werely and wifely hy made hem.
28. God blessed hem and said to hem, ‘Be wassombere and feelfold; fill the
    earth and tame it. Lord over the fish in the sea and the birds in the lift
    and over every living deer that agoeth on the ground.’
29. Then God said, ‘I yeave you every seed-bearing wort on the bred of the
    whole earth and every tree that hath ovet mid seed in it. Hy will be yours
    for food.
30. And to all the deer of the earth and all the birds in the lift and all the
    deer that ago along the ground – everything that hath the breath of life in
    it – I yeave every green wort for food.’ And it was so.
31. God saw all that hy had made, and it was truly good. And there was evening,
    and there was morning – the sixth day.

<!-- Abbreviations -->
*[anlikeness]: image
*[ago]: move
*[agoeth]: moves
*[blead]: vegetation
*[bred]: surface
*[lift]: sky
*[other]: second
*[sains]: signs
*[yeave]: give

<!-- Footnotes -->
[^mid]: In OE, the preposition for *with* was not *wiþ* but *mid*, which
    generally meant the same thing as modern with except for the use of *with*
    to mean *against*, as shown in *the knight fought with the dragon*.
    Meanwhile, OE *wiþ* had a few meanings related to location such as *near*
    and *toward*, but mainly meant *against*. It is likely that Norse influence
    caused *with* to mainly show instrumentality and thus caused *mid* to fall
    into disuse.
[^plant]: *plant* was derived from Old English, which got it from Latin,
    however the broader sense of "any vegetable life, vegetation generally"
    came from Old French.
