# Genesis 2 - Adam and Ewe

1. Thus the heavens and the earth were made whole in all her widegale umbeight.
2. By the seventh day God had done the work hy had been doing; so on the
   seventh day hy rested from all her work.
3. Then God blessed the seventh day and made it holy, for on it hy rested from
   all the work of making that hy had done.
4. This is the telling of the heavens and the earth when hy were made, when the
   Lord God made the earth and the heavens.
5. Now no shrub had yet arose on the earth and no wort had yet sprung up, for
   the Lord God had not sent rain on the earth and there was no one to work the
   ground,
6. but streams came up from the earth and watered the whole bred of the ground.
7. Then the Lord God shaped a were from the dust of the ground, and breathed
   into his nostrils the breath of life, and the were became a living being.
8. Now the Lord God had wortwaled a leighton in the east, in *Eden*; and there
   hy put the were hy had shaped.
9. The Lord God made all kinds of trees grow out of the ground – trees that
   were sightly and good for food. In the middle of the leighton were the tree
   of life and the tree of the cunning[^cunning] of good and evil.
10. An ea watering the leighton flowed from *Eden*; from there it was broken up
    into four headwaters.
11. The name of the first is the *Pishon*; it winds through the whole land of
    Havilah, where there is gold.
12. (The gold of that land is good; sweetwatered cud and *onyx*[^onyx] be also
    there.)
13. The name of the twoth ea is the *Gihon*; it winds through the whole land of
    Cush[^Cush].
14. The name of the third ea is the *Tigris*; it runs along the east side of
    Ashur. And the fourth ea is the *Euphrates*.
15. The Lord God nimmed the were and put him in the Leighton of *Eden* to work
    it and look after it.
16. And the Lord God bade the were, ‘Thou art free to eat from any tree in the
    leighton;
17. but thou must not eat from the tree of the cunning of good and evil, for
    when thou eatest from it thou willest wissly dead.’
18. The Lord God said, ‘It is not good for the were to be alone. I will make a
    worthy helper for him.’
19. Now the Lord God had shaped out of the ground all the wild deer and all the
    birds in the lift. He brought hem to the were to see what he would name
    hem; and whatever the were named each living deer, that was its name.
20. So the were yave names to all the livestock, the birds in the sky and all
    the wild deer. <br/></br> But for Adam[^Adam] no worthy helper was found.
21. So the Lord God made the were fall into a deep sleep; and while he was
    sleeping, hy nimmed one of the were's ribs[^ribs] and then clised[^closed]
    up the spot mid flesh.
22. Then the Lord God made a wife from the rib[^rib] he had nimmed out of the
    were, and hy brought her to the were.
23. The were said,

    > ‘This is now bone of my bones<br/>
    >   and flesh of my flesh;<br/>
    > she shall be named “woman”,</br> for she was nimmed out of man.’<br/>

24. That is why a were leaves his father and mother and is bound to his wife,
    and hy become one flesh.
25. Adam and his wife were both naked, and hy felt no shame.

<!-- Abbreviations -->
*[bade]: (NE) commanded
*[be]: (NE) be; are
*[bred]: surface
*[clised]: closed
*[cud]: resin
*[cunning]: knowledge
*[dead]: die
*[deal]: part, component, portion
*[ea]: river
<!-- *[fuldone]: completed, finished -->
*[lift]: sky
*[man]: a human; NOT a male human
*[shaped]: formed
*[sightly]: (NE) pleasing to the eye
*[umbeight]: collection, combination
*[were]: man (noun); were (verb)
*[were's]: man's
*[widegale]: vast, spacious, extensive
*[worthy]: (NE) suitable

<!-- Footnotes -->
[^cunning]: *knowledge* seems to be a fully native word, but the *-ledge*
    suffix may have come from a Scandinavian source, according to Etymonline.
[^Cush]: Possibly south-east Mesopotamia.
[^Adam]: Or *the man*.
[^ribs]: Or *nimmed deal of the were's side*
[^rib]: Or *deal*.
[^closed]: *clised* was used instead of *closed*, as *closed* has some French
    influence.
[^onyx]: The Anglo-Saxons did not have names for a lot of gemstones that were
    not found, and the earliest mention of onyx is 264 years after the Norman
    Conquest, so it is likely we would have borrowed this.
