# Genesis 3 - The fall

1. Now the snake was craftier than any of the wild deer the Lord God had made.
   He said to the wife, ‘Did God truly say, “You must not eat from any tree in
   the leighton”?’
2. The wife said to the snake, ‘We may eat ovet from the trees in the leighton,
3. but God did say, “Thou must not eat ovet from the tree that is in the middle
   of the leighton, and thou must not touch it, or thou willest dead.”’
4. ‘Thou willest not wissly dead,’ the snake said to the wife.
5. ‘For God knows that when thou eatest from it thine eyes will[^will] be
   opened, and thou willest be like God, knowing good and evil.’
6. When the wife saw that the ovet of the tree was good for food and sightly,
   and also willsome for gaining wisdom, she nimmed some and ate it.
7. Then the eyes of both of hem were opened, and hy understood that hy were
   naked; so hy sewed fike leaves together and made hames for hemselves.
8. Then the were and his wife heard the swey of the Lord God as hy were walking
   in the leighton in the cool of the day, and hy hid from the Lord God among
   the trees of the leighton.
9. But the Lord God chied to the were, ‘Where art thou?’
10. He answered, ‘I heard thee in the leighton, and I was scared since I was
    naked; so I hid.’
11. And hy said, ‘Who told thee that thou wast naked? Hast thou eaten from the
    tree from which I bade you not to eat?’
12. The were said, ‘The wife thou puttest here mid me – she yave me some ovet
    from the tree, and I ate it.’
13. Then the Lord God said to the wife, ‘What is this thou hast done?’
    <br/>The wife said, ‘The snake misled me, and I ate.’
14. So the Lord God said to the snake, ‘Since thou hast done this,
15. 'Cursed art thou above all livestock
    <br/>and all wild deer!
    <br/>Thou willest smow on thy belly
    <br/>and thou willest eat dust
    <br/>all the days of thy life.
    <br/>And I will put foeship
    <br/>between thou and the wife,
    <br/>and between thine offspring[^offspring] and hers;
    <br/>he will crush[^crush] thy head,
    <br/>and thou willest strike his heel.'
16. To the wife he said,
    <br/>‘I will make thy warks in childbearing awfully swingeing;
    <br/>mid warkand swink thou willest bear children.
    <br/>Thy craving will be for thy were,
    <br/>and he will lord over thee.’
17. To Adam he said, ‘Since thou listenedst to thy wife and ate ovet from the
    tree about which I bade you, “You must not eat from it,”
    <br/>‘Cursed is the ground thanks to thee;
    <br/>through warkand swink thou willest eat food from it
    <br/>all the days of thy life.
18. It will bring forth thorns and thistles for thee,
    <br/>and thou willest eat the worts of the field.
19. By the sweat of thy brow
    <br/>thou willest eat thy food
    <br/>oth thou goest back to the ground,
    <br/>since from it thou wast nimmed;
    <br/>for dust thou art
    <br/>and to dust thou willest go back.’
20. Adam[^Adam] named his wife Ewe,[^Ewe] as she would become the mother of all
    the living.
21. The Lord God made weeds of hide for Adam and his wife and clothed hem.
22. And the Lord God said, ‘The were has now become like one of us, knowing
    good and evil. He must not be left to reach out his hand and nim also from
    the tree of life and eat, and live for ever.’
23. So the Lord God outed him from the Leighton of *Eden* to work the ground
    from which he had been nimmed.
24. After hy drove the were out, hy put on the east side[^east] of the Leighton
    of *Eden* *cherubim* and a leaming sword lixing[^lixing] back and forth to
    ward the way to the tree of life.

<!-- Abbreviations -->
*[bade]: commanded
*[bear]: give birth to
*[dead]: die
*[fike]: fig
*[foeship]: enmity, the opposite of friendship
*[goest]: go
*[hide]: skin
*[leaming]: flaming
*[left]: allowed
*[listenedst]: listened
*[lixing]: flashing
*[oth]: until
*[outed]: banished
*[puttest]: put
<!-- *[returnest]: return -->
*[sightly]: pleasing to the eye
*[smow]: crawl, creep
*[swey]: sound
*[swingeing]: severe, extreme
*[swink]: toil, labour
*[ward]: guard
*[warkand]: painful
*[warks]: pains
*[weeds]: garments
*[were]: man; were (verb)
*[willsome]: desirable

<!-- Footnotes -->
[^offspring]: or *seed*.
[^crush]: or *strike*.
[^Adam]: or *the were*.
[^Ewe]: *Ewe* probably means *living* in the original Hebrew.
[^east]: or *put in front*.
[^will]: Could have used *wilt*, but I'm only using the archaic conjugations
    when paired with *thou*.
[^lixing]: English word was "flashing". In the sense of a light flash, the word
    *lixing* is correct. In the sense of flaunting, the word *touting* would be
    used.
