# Genesis 4 - Cain and Abel

1. Adam[^Adam] made love to his wife Ewe, and she became with child and bore
   Cain.[^Cain] She said, ‘Mid the help of the Lord I have brought
   forth[^brought-forth] a were.’
2. Later she bore his brother Abel.
   <br/>Now Abel kept flocks, and Cain worked the soil.
3. In the course of time Cain brought some of the ovets of the soil as an
   offering to the Lord.
4. But Abel also brough an offering – fat dealths from some of the firstborn of
   his flock. The Lord looked with fondness on Abel and his offering,
5. but on Cain and his offering he did not look with fondness. So Cain was
   thoroughly wroth, and he was heartsick.[^heartsick]
6. Then the Lord said to Cain, ‘Why art thou wroth? Why is thy leer heartsick?
7. If you do what is right, willest thou not be welcomed? But if thou dost not
   do what is right, sin is smowing at thy door; it yearns to have thee, but
   thou must wield over it.’
8. Now Cain said to his brother Abel, ‘Let's go out to the field.’[^field]
   While hy were in the field, Cain attacked his brother Abel and murdered him.
9. Then the Lord said to Cain, ‘Where is thy brother Abel?’
   <br/>‘I don't know,’ he replied. ‘Am I my brother's ward?’
10. The Lord said, ‘What hast thou done? Listen! Thy brother's blood chyeth out
    to me from the ground.
11. Now thou art under a curse and driven from the ground, which opened its
    mouth to be yeaven thy brother's blood from thy hand.
12. When thou workest the ground, it will no longer yield its crops for thee.
    Thou willest be a restless wanderer on earth.’
13. Cain said to the Lord, ‘My wrake is more than I can bear.
14. Today thou art driving me from the land, and I will be hidden from thy
    anwardness[^anwardness]; I will be a restless wanderer on the earth, and
    whoever findeth me will slay me.’
15. But the Lord said to him, ‘Not so;[^not-so] anyone who slayeth Cain will
    throe wrake seven times over.’ Then the Lord put a mark on Cain so that no
    one who found him would slay him.
16. So Cain went out from the Lord's anwardness and lived in the land of
    Nod,[^Nod] east of Eden.
17. Cain made love to his wife, and she became with child and bore Enoch. Cain
    was then building a borough, and he named it after his son Enoch.
18. To Enoch was born Irad, and Irad was the father of Mehujael, and Mehujael
    was the father of Methushael, and Methushael was the father of Lamech.
19. Lamech married two wives, one named Adah and the other Zillah.
20. Adah gave birth to Jabal; he was the father of those who live in
    telds[^telds] and rear livestock.
21. His brother's name was Jubal; he was the father of all who play
    stringed[^stringed] gleen[^gleen] tools and pipes.
22. Zillah also had a son, Tubal-Cain, who hewed all kinds of tools out of
    brass[^brass] and iron. Tubal-Cain's sister was Naamah.
23. Lamech said to his wives,
    <br/>‘Adah and Zillah, listen to me;
    <br/>wives of Lamech, hear me words.
    <br/>I have slain a were for wounding me,
    <br/>a young were for scathing me.
24. If Cain is wraked for[^wraked-for] seven times,
    <br/>then Lamech seventy-seven times.’
25. Adam made love to his wife ayen, and she bore a son and named him
    Seth,[^Seth] saying ‘God has granted me another child in stead of Abel,
    since Cain slew him.’
26. Seth also had a son, and he named him Enosh.
    <br/>At that time people began to bode[^bode] the name of the Lord.

<!-- Abbreviations -->
*[anwardness]: presence
*[bode]: proclaim, preach
*[brass]: bronze
*[dealths]: portions
*[heartsick]: despondent
*[hewed]: shaped, forged
*[in stead]: instead, in place (of)
*[leer]: face, appearance
*[reap]: receive
*[scathing]: injuring
*[throw]: suffer, pain
*[tools]: instruments; tools
*[ward]: guard, guardian
*[wield]: rule, govern
*[wrake]: punishment, ruin; vengeance
*[wraked for]: avenged

<!-- Footnotes -->
[^Adam]: Or *the were*.
[^Cain]: Cain sounds like the Hebrew for *brought forth* or *acquired*.
[^brought-forth]: Or *have acquired* in English.
[^heartsick]: In English: *his face was downcast*.
[^field]: Samaritan Pentateuch, Septuagint, Vulgate and Syriac; Masoretic Text
    does not have *‘Let’s go out to the field.’*
[^anwardness]: A created word coming from *anward* 'present, in one's presence'
    + *-ness* 'showing state or condition'. Essentially, it means "the state or
      condition of being present or in one's presence" or "presence".
[^not-so]: Septuagint, Vulgate and Syriac; Hebrew *Very well*.
[^Nod]: *Nod* means *wandering* (see verses 12 and 14).
[^telds]: *teld* is an obsolete Modern English word meaning *tent*, which
    differs from the Wordbook word *tield*, both from the same Middle English
    source.
[^stringed]: Would probably have rhymed with *cringed* were it not for Norse
    influence.
[^gleen]: Meaning *musical*. Formed from *glee* 'music' + *-en* adjective
    suffix meaning 'to pertain to'. Essentially means 'pertaining to music'.
[^brass]: *brass* meant both *brass* and *bronze* in Middle English
[^wraked-for]: Literally *exacted vengeance for*.
[^Seth]: Seth probably means *granted*.
[^bode]: Original English text said *call on*.
