# Genesis 5 - From Adam to Noah

1. This is the book of the strinds of Adam. In the day that God made man, in
   the likeness of God hy made him;
2. Werely and wifely hy made hem; and blessed hem, and named hem ‘Mankind’, in
   the day when hy were made.
3. And Adam lived a hundred and thirty years, and beyat a son in his own
   likeness, and after his anlikeness; and named him Seth:
4. And the days of Adam after he had beyotten Seth were eight hundred years:
   and he beyat sons and daughters:
5. And all the days that Adam lived were nine hundred and thirty years: and he
   awent.
6. And Seth lived a hundred and five years, and beyat Enosh:
7. And Seth lived after he beyat Enosh eight hundred and seven years, and beyat
   sons and daughters:
8. And all the days of Seth were nine hundred and twelve years: and he awent.
9. And Enosh lived ninety years, and beyat Kenan:
10. And Enosh lived after he beyat Kenan eight hundred and fifteen years, and
    beyat sons and daughters:
11. And all the days of Enosh were nine hundred and five years: and he awent.
12. And Kenan lived seventy years and beyat Mahalalel:
13. And Kenan lived after he beyat Mahalalel eight hundred and forty years, and
    beyat sons and daughters:
14. And all the days of Kenan were nine hundred and ten years: and he awent.
15. And Mahalalel lived sixty and five years, and beyat Jared:
16. And Mahalalel lived after he beyat Jared eight hundred and thirty years,
    and beyat sons and daughters:
17. And all the days of Mahalalel were eight hundred ninety and five years: and
    he awent.
18. And Jared lived a hundred sixty and two years, and he beyat Enoch:
19. And Jared lived after he beyat Enoch eight hundred years, and beyat sons
    and daughters:
20. And all the days of Jared were nine hundred sixty and two years: and he
    awent.
21. And Enoch lived sixty and five years, and beyat Methuselah:
22. And Enoch walked with God after he beyat Methuselah three hundred years,
    and beyat sons and daughters:
23. And all the days of Enoch were three hundred sixty and five years:
24. And Enoch walked with God: then he was no more; for God nimmed him.
25. And Methuselah lived an hundred eighty and seven years, and beyat Lamech.
26. And Methuselah lived after he beyat Lamech seven hundred eighty and two
    years, and beyat sons and daughters:
27. And all the days of Methuselah were nine hundred sixty and nine years: and
    he awent.
28. And Lamech lived an hundred eighty and two years, and beyat a son:
29. And he named him Noah, saying, ‘He shall hearten us about our work and
    hardship of our hands[^Noah], in the wake of the ground which the Lord hath
    mansed.’
30. And Lamech lived after he beyat Noah five hundred ninety and five years,
    and beyat sons and daughters:
31. And all the days of Lamech were seven hundred seventy and seven years: and
    he awent.
32. And Noah was five hundred years old: and Noah beyat Shem, Ham, and Japheth.

<!-- Abbreviations -->


<!-- Footnotes -->
[^Noah]: The Hebrew word for Noah, *נֹחַ* (nōaḥ) sounds like "rest, comfort"
    *נָחַם* (nāḥam).

<!-- BUFFER -->
